Strimzi Gatekeeper plugin system (#220)
strimzi/proposals: 141-Strimzi-Gatekeeper-plugin-system.md

# Strimzi _Gatekeeper_ plugin system

This proposal suggests introducing a new plugin system called _Gatekeeper_.

## Current situation

> Strimzi currently supports only one type of plugin: Pod Security Providers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Strimzi currently supports only one type of plugin: Pod Security Provider plugins.
```

> The Pod Security Provider plugins can be used to inject security context for the various containers deployed by the Strimzi Cluster Operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Pod Security Provider plugins can be used to inject security contexts into the containers deployed by the Strimzi Cluster Operator.
```

> The Pod security providers are called directly from the Cluster Operator methods that generate the containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Pod Security Provider plugins are called directly from the Cluster Operator methods that generate containers.
```

Strimzi users can use the built-in providers or provide their own custom provider.

## Motivation

The motivation for the Gatekeeper plugin system comes from two sources.
The first is the internal code structure, including its complexity and testability.
The second is the ability to add new custom features that might or might not be part of the core Strimzi project.

### Strimzi code structure, complexity, and testability

While the Pod Security Provider plugins are useful, their design is not practical, especially in the way they integrate with the Cluster Operator.
Because they integrate directly into the methods that generate the containers, they lead to complex internal logic within the core operator methods.
The operator has to:
* Take into account the security context configured by the user in the custom resource

> * Pass it through the Pod security provider to get the actual context that should be used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Pass it through the Pod Security Provider plugin to get the security context that should be used
```

* Set it in the container

This increases the complexity of the operator code.
It also increases the testing requirements, because you need to test the various combinations within the core operator.

> And while the only plugin type we have today is the Pod Security Provider, we repeat this pattern in other places as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although Pod Security Provider plugins are currently the only supported plugin type, similar patterns are repeated elsewhere in the code base.
```

The lack of pluggable entry points also makes it hard to add new custom features that might not be interesting to the whole Strimzi community.
That often leaves our users in a tough position:
* They can keep trying to convince us (Strimzi maintainers) that some feature is valid for everyone, but they might never succeed.
* They can try to implement their features at a different level (for example as a Kubernetes admission controller).
* They can fork Strimzi and maintain their feature in their own fork while trying to keep it working and up-to-date.

None of these options is ideal.
While the Gatekeeper plugin system described below does not solve every user requirement, it could help in at least some cases.
One of the later sections describes examples of Gatekeeper plugins that users might implement to address these issues.

## Proposal

Gatekeeper plugins would be invoked at the beginning and at the end of the reconciliation, controlling entry to and exit from that reconciliation.
When reconciliation starts, the custom resource being reconciled would be passed to the _entry_ method of the Gatekeeper plugin.

> When reconciliation completes, whether successfully or with an error, the result and the updated custom resource(s), including status, would be passed to the _exit_ method of the Gatekeeper plugins.

Reviewer: Would exit plugins run even if reconciliation fails before resource generation or status updates occur?

Author: Yes. An error raised by the plugin in its _entry_ method will be treated as any other reconciliation failure. The exact error will be added to the status section of the custom resource and reported in the operator logs. It would also trigger the _exit_ methods of all the Gatekeeper plugins. This applies to both unexpected errors due to some bug or issue as well as to the resource being rejected by a (validating) plugin.

I updated the text.

> There would be two basic types of Gatekeeper plugins:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There would be two types of Gatekeeper plugins:
```

* Validating plugins
* Mutating plugins

The validating plugins would receive the custom resource(s) and would be able to fail reconciliation by raising an error.
But they would not be able to modify the custom resource(s) and/or their status.

The mutating plugins would be able to fail the reconciliation by raising an error.

> They would also be able to modify the custom resource(s) before the reconciliation starts or their status when the reconciliation ends.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They would also be able to modify the custom resource(s) before the reconciliation starts or modify their status when the reconciliation ends.
```

These modifications would of course need to follow the Strimzi API.
The plugins would not be able to add any new fields.
Any modifications made by the plugin would be internal only.

> They would not be persisted into the Kubernetes API.

Reviewer: I'm not clear on persisted resource state and reconciliation-scoped mutations.
Maybe an example would help.

Author: I added some examples and bit more explanation.

----

The modifications done to the custom resource in the _entry_ method will be internal only and will be used only within the same reconciliation.
The updated resources would not be updated in the Kubernetes API and the changes done by the plugin would not be stored anywhere.
The changes will also not be visible to other applications through the Kubernetes API.
As a result, the plugins would need to apply the changes to the custom resource at every invocation.
_(This is similar to how virtual node pools were used during migration to node pools or how Connect and MirrorMaker2 custom resources were modified internally during migration from the `v1beta2` to `v1` APIs.)_

For example:
* User creates a `Kafka` CR with the following configuration:
  ```yaml
  apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
  kind: Kafka
  metadata:
    name: my-cluster
  spec:
    kafka:
      # ...
  ```
* A TLSv1.3 enforcer implemented as mutating plugin would inject into it TLSv1.3 configuration in its _entry_ method:
  ```yaml
  apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
  kind: Kafka
  metadata:
    name: my-cluster
  spec:
    kafka:
      config:
        ssl.protocol: TLSv1.3
        ssl.enabled.protocols: TLSv1.3
      # ...
  ```
* This modified resource would be used for the reconciliation.
  However, it would never be stored to the Kubernetes API in this form and other users using the Kubernetes API would never see it in this form.

Modifications done by the _exit_ methods to the `.status` section of the custom resource would be persisted to the Kubernetes API and visible to users and other applications.
However, Strimzi cleans up the `.status` section during the reconciliation.
So the plugins might need to update the status in the same way in every reconciliation as well.

For example:
* A `Kafka` CR was reconciled and is Ready:
  ```yaml
  apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
  kind: Kafka
  metadata:
    name: my-cluster
  spec:
    # ...
  status:
    conditions: 
      - lastTransitionTime: "2019-08-20T11:37:00.706Z"
        status: "True"
        type: Ready
  ```
* A Security helper implemented as mutating plugin would inject a warning condition in its _exit_ method:
  ```yaml
  apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
  kind: Kafka
  metadata:
    name: my-cluster
  spec:
    # ...
  status:
    conditions: 
      - lastTransitionTime: "2019-08-20T11:37:00.706Z"
        status: "True"
        type: Ready
      - lastTransitionTime: "2019-08-20T11:37:00.706Z"
        status: "True"
        type: Warning
        message: "Listener plain does not have TLS encryption enabled"
  ```
* This modified resource (its `.status` section) would be stored in the Kubernetes API.
  Users and other tools querying the Kubernetes API would see the warning message.

> They would only be used within a given reconciliation, similarly to how we used _virtual node pools_ when migrating to node pools or how we modified the Connect and MirrorMaker2 custom resources during the migration from `v1beta2` to `v1` APIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They would only be used within a given reconciliation, similarly to how virtual node pools were used during migration to node pools or how Connect and MirrorMaker2 custom resources were modified internally during migration from the `v1beta2` to `v1` APIs.
```

Each plugin would be allowed to implement the _entry_ and _exit_ methods for one or more custom resources.
That would allow us to write plugins that, for example, apply only to `Kafka` resources.
Or plugins that want to gate all custom resources.

### Implementation

### Configuring Gatekeeper plugins

There would be three different groups of Gatekeeper plugins:
* Mandatory plugins would be hardcoded in the Strimzi source code and would not be configurable.
  These might be the plugins that Strimzi requires to work.
* Default plugins would have a default configuration hardcoded in the Strimzi source code.
  These would be the plugins Strimzi provides and _recommends_.

>   But the default plugins could be changed by the users who can configure their own default plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  But the default plugins could be changed by users who wish to configure their own default plugins.
```

* Custom plugins would be unset by default, and users would need to configure them explicitly.
  Custom plugins would be the plugins provided by Strimzi but disabled by default.

>   Or actually custom plugins brought in by the user.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Or custom plugins brought in by the user.
```

The custom plugins would be configured through the Cluster Operator environment variable `STRIMZI_GATEKEEPER_CUSTOM_PLUGINS`.
Users should generally configure custom plugins through this variable.
The default plugin configuration should be used when a user wants to disable one or more default plugins.

The configuration will be independent for each operator and will not be mirrored automatically.
The main reason is that plugins might often apply only to some operators (for example, only to the Cluster Operator) and might not be present in the others.
So mirroring the configuration might lead to errors.
Users can use the `template` section of `.spec.entityOperator` to configure the Gatekeeper plugins for User and Topic operators.
When using standalone Topic or User operators, users can set these variables in their standalone deployments.

#### Per-resource configuration

The plugins will be configured only on a per-operator basis.
They will not support any direct configuration on a per-custom resource basis.
However, plugins can easily skip some resources based on an annotation.

> For example, a custom resource with the annotation `my-gatekeeper-plugin.scholz.cz/skip=true` can be used to tell the plugin to skip this custom resource.

Reviewer: Are there any security or policy considerations around skipping resources?

Author: To be clear, there will be no general way how to skip any plugin. If the plugin authors think skipping the plugin can be useful, they could add support for it. I made it more clear in the proposal text.

So for example, if you write a plugin that enforces some security settings, it is up to the plugin to decide if you want to have it skippable or not. There will be no built-in way that will get Strimzi to skip it.

#### Ordering

The Gatekeeper plugins will be ordered.
At reconciliation _entry_, they will always be called in the following order:
* Custom plugins
* Default plugins
* Mandatory plugins

Within each plugin group, the plugins will be invoked in the order specified by the user or by the Strimzi source code.

At reconciliation _exit_, they will always be called in the following order:
* Mandatory plugins
* Default plugins
* Custom plugins

Within each plugin group, the plugins will be invoked in the reverse order specified by the user or by the Strimzi source code.

#### Plugin interfaces

The Gatekeeper plugins would be defined through a series of interfaces.

The first interface, `GatekeeperPlugin`, would define the plugins.
It would contain a single method, `configure(...)`, which would be called once at startup when the plugin is instantiated.
As a parameter, it would accept a `GatekeeperPluginConfigurationContext` record.
Initially, the context would contain an instance of the Fabric8 Kubernetes client and an instance of the Strimzi `PlatformFeatures` class describing the environment in which the operator is running.
The `configure(...)` method would return `void`.

> There would also be two additional interfaces per assembly operator:

Reviewer: Is it clear what we mean by _assembly operator_? Should we give some context?

Author: I reworded it. The _assembly operator_ term should be known to Strimzi developers. But not to regular users. The way it is meant here is basically _operand type_.

* Mutating plugin interface named `GatekeeperMutating<Type>Plugin` (e.g. `GatekeeperMutatingKafkaPlugin` or `GatekeeperMutatingKafkaBridgePlugin`)
* Validating plugin interface named `GatekeeperValidating<Type>Plugin` (e.g. `GatekeeperValidatingKafkaPlugin` or `GatekeeperValidatingKafkaBridgePlugin`)

Plugins would exist for the following types:
* `Kafka` (handles both `Kafka` and `KafkaNodePool` resources)
* `KafkaConnect` (handles both `KafkaConnect` and `KafkaConnector` resources)
* `KafkaMirrorMaker2`
* `KafkaBridge`
* `KafkaRebalance`
* `KafkaUser`
* `KafkaTopic`

> At least initially, there would be no plugin for `StrimziPodSet` resources.

Reviewer: Why are we not including this first time around? Maybe mention?

Author: `StrimziPodSet` resources are internal resources only and are not exposed to Strimzi users.
They also serve a very simple purpose - to create the Pods.
And if needed, any modifications to the Pods can be easily done also through Kubernetes's own mechanisms.
However, this can be reconsidered in the future if we see some demand and use-cases for it.

I will add it to the proposal.

Initially, it would be an empty record without any fields.
However, it might be used in the future.
* The custom resource which the plugin should evaluate including the updated status section.
* In case of Kafka and Kafka Connect plugins, a collection with the secondary resources (Kafka node pools or connectors).
* For mutating plugins, the method would return a completion stage containing the updated custom resources.
For Kafka and Kafka Connect, it would return a record with the primary custom resource and a collection of the secondary custom resources.
Only the updates to the `.status` section of these resources would take any effect.
Validating plugins would return a _void_ completion stage.

#### Loading and calling the plugins

The same mechanism currently used for Pod Security Provider plugins would also be used for Gatekeeper plugins.
The plugins would be loaded at operator startup through a `GatekeeperPluginFactory` singleton class.
The factory will take the configured plugins and load them through the Java Service Loader mechanism based on the `GatekeeperPlugin` interface.

> When some configured plugins are missing, it will report the error and fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If any configured plugins are missing, the operator will report an error and fail to start.
```

#### Java modules

As with Pod Security Providers, the interfaces needed to implement the Gatekeeper plugins will be part of the `api` module.
The actual implementations provided by Strimzi will be part of:
* The corresponding operator module for plugins related to a single operator only
* The `operator-common` module for plugins shared by all operators
* A separate repository for any plugins we might provide to Strimzi users as maintained by Strimzi but fully optional

Users' own custom plugins will live in their own repositories.

### Use cases

The Gatekeeper plugins provide significant opportunities.
Apart from validating or modifying resources, they can also integrate with other systems and platforms, for example by making remote calls.
This section covers some examples that would be good candidates for this mechanism.

#### Internal use cases

The motivation section already described several internal use cases where Gatekeeper plugins might allow us to simplify our code base and tests.

Let's take labels as a detailed example.
Strimzi could provide two different Gatekeeper plugins:
* 3scale discovery labels plugin
* Custom environment variable-based labels plugin

> The _3scale discovery labels plugin_ would be a mutating `KafkaBridge` Gatekeeper plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The _3scale discovery labels plugin_ would be a mutating Gatekeeper plugin for `KafkaBridge` resources.
```

        status: "True"
        type: Ready
  ```
* A Security helper implemented as mutating plugin would inject a warning condition in its _exit_ method:
  ```yaml
  apiVersion: kafka.strimzi.io/v1
  kind: Kafka
  metadata:
    name: my-cluster
  spec:
    # ...
  status:
    conditions: 
      - lastTransitionTime: "2019-08-20T11:37:00.706Z"
        status: "True"
        type: Ready
      - lastTransitionTime: "2019-08-20T11:37:00.706Z"
        status: "True"
        type: Warning
        message: "Listener plain does not have TLS encryption enabled"
  ```
* This modified resource (its `.status` section) would be stored in the Kubernetes API.
  Users and other tools querying the Kubernetes API would see the warning message.

All modifications - regardless whether in the _entry_ or _exit_ methods - would of course also need to follow the Strimzi API.
The plugins would not be able to add any new fields.

Each plugin would be allowed to implement the _entry_ and _exit_ methods for one or more custom resources.
That would allow us to write plugins that, for example, apply only to `Kafka` resources.
Or plugins that want to gate all custom resources.

> 

Reviewer: The Error handling title isn't showing properly with these blank lines

* In case of Kafka and Kafka Connect, a collection with the secondary resources (Kafka node pools or connectors).
* For mutating plugins, the method would return a completion stage containing the updated custom resources.
For Kafka and Kafka Connect, it would return a record with the primary custom resource and a collection of the secondary custom resources.
Validating plugins would return a _void_ completion stage.
Validation failure would be indicated by throwing an exception.
This would fail the reconciliation and the exception (its error) will be used in the custom resource `.status` section.

The _exit_ method would have three or four parameters:
* `Gatekeeper<Type>ExitContext` would be a record containing additional information passed to the plugin.
Initially, it would be an empty record without any fields.
However, it might be used in the future.
* The original custom resource which the plugin should evaluate including the original status section.
* In case of Kafka and Kafka Connect, a collection with the secondary resources (Kafka node pools or connectors).
* The new custom resource status section, which the plugin should evaluate.

> * In case of Kafka and Kafka Connect plugins, there will be a secondary _exit_ method for handling the sattus of the secondary resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* In case of Kafka and Kafka Connect plugins, there will be a secondary _exit_ method for handling the status of the secondary resource.
```
